Event "Rivers and Harbors Act" 1846 "A federal infrastructure bill vetoed by Polk that angered western Democrats, sending many to the Free Soil Party."
, Event "Founding of the Free Soil Party" 1848 "An all-Northern political party made of Northern Democrats who favored westward expansion and \"internal improvements\" and anti-slavery \"conscience Whigs.\" Ironically, Van Buren was their candidate. (\"The Van Buren of Today,\" Charles Sumner called it.)"
, Event "Gold Rush" 1849 "Ooops, now California needs a territorian government. Will it have slavery?"
, Event "Compromise of 1850" 1850 "1) Free State (California) 8) [the 'ated] Fugitive Slave Act , Popular 5)overeignty in the Mexican Cession, 0 slave trade in DC"
, Event "Uncle Tom's Cabin published" 1851 "Written in response to the Fugitive Slave Act, this block-buster novel made it harder for Northerners to ignore the miseries of slavery."
, Event "Kansas-Nebraska Act" 1854 "Stephen Douglas (IL-D) proposed that the question of slavery in Kansas and Nebraska should be decided by popular sovereignty (thus changing the Missouri Compromise)."
, Event "Ostend Manifesto" 1856 "Secret US document to European powers asserting the right to take Cuba."
, Event "Filibusting of William Walker" 1856 "William Walker set up himself as President of Nicaragua. His \"filibusting\" came to be seen as pro-slavery."
, Event "Dred Scott Case" 1857 "Roger Taney's court determined people of African descent were not citizens of the US and \"had no rights a white man was bound to respect''—and that Congress had no right  to make laws about slavery in the territories."
, Event "Raid on Harper's Ferry" 1859 "Following his massacre of 5 pro-slavery men in Kansas, John Brown attempted to jump-start the Civil War by taking over a Virginia (now West Virginia) arsenal. That he was saluted by many prominent northerners was seen as a deep insult to the south."
, Event "Lincoln-Douglas Debates" 1858 "In their battle for the senate two years before their presidential contest, Stephen Douglas and Abraham Lincoln met in 3-hour discussions that frequently focused on slavery though their home state (Illinois) was a free state."
, Event "Election of Lincoln" 1860 "Lincoln won the 1860 election without a single electoral vote from the South."
, Event "South Carolina secedes" 1861 "Following Lincoln's election, South Carolina announced the compact between itself and its sister states had already been broken by the actions of the North."
, Event "Formation of the American or \"Know-Nothing\" party" 1844 "In 1855, this party changed its name from \"The Native American party.\" Commonly known as the \"Know-Nothings,\" it was a nativist, anti-immigrant party that swept Massachusetts elections in the 1850s."
, Event "Formation of the Republican Party" 1856 "After the Whig party fell apart in response to Bleeding Kansas, Northern (but not southern) Whigs largerly moved to the new Republican Party."
, Event "Formation of the Confederate States of America" 1861 "In February, seven states formed the CSA with a capital in Montgomery, AL before later moving to Richmond, Virginia. Others joined in March and April including parts of MO and KY."
, Event "Battle of Manassas" 1861 "First major battle of the Civil War, a Confederate victory, also called the Battle of Bull Run. The extensive causalities signaled a new kind of war."
, Event "Second Confiscation Act" 1862 "\"Congress anticipated Lincoln by passing a law allowing escaped confederate slaves to be considered free; to arm Black men... and to move towards \"colonization.\""
, Event "New York Draft Riots" 1863 "Violent, often anti-African-American riots in New York City."
, Event "Battle of Antietem" 1862 "Single most violent day in US History, with nearly 4,000 deaths on September 17 (Constitution Day). Though there was no clear victory,  Lincoln used it the pretext to issue the Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation."
, Event "Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation" 1862 "On September 22, Lincoln gave the CSA until January 1st to rejoin the union or have their slaves freed by fiat."
, Event "Emancipation Proclamation" 1863 "On January 1st, Lincoln proclaimed all slaves in the CSA free."
, Event "Battle of Gettsyburg/Vicksburg" 1863 "These twin summer Union victories after brutal campaigns signaled a turning-point in the war."
, Event "Gettysburg Address" 1863 "Four score and seven years after the Declaration of Independence, Lincoln issued this brief address."
, Event "Sherman's \"March to the Sea\"" 1864 "William Tecumseh Sherman's destructive march across Georgia burned Atlanta and Savannah and signaled imminent Norther"
, Event "Surrender at Appomattox" 1865 "On April 9th. Robert E. Lee surrendered to US Grant in a town called Appomattox Courthouse. "
, Event "Lincoln Assassinated" 1865 "Lincoln was shot on April 14th and died a day later. "
, Event "Invention of the Saxophone" 1846 "Saxophone invented"
, Event "Liberty Party changes the election" 1844 "Henry Clay would have won the election if he had carried New York, but the Liberty Party took enough votes to change the outcome (if they'd vote for Clay)."
, Event "Senate tips to the Free states" 1850 "With the addition of California,the House, Senate, and Electorial college were dominated by free states."
, Event "Caning of Charles Sumner" 1856 "In response to Sumner's speech refering to the pro-slavery violence in Kansas as representing the \"spew and vomit of an uneasy civilization,\" Congressman Preston Brooks (SC) beat Sumner into a bloody pulp."
, Event "\"House Divided Speech\"" 1858 "In his run for the Senate, Lincoln declared a conpiracy to spread slavery and said the country could not last half slave and half free."