"Founding of Jamestown"	1607	"First permanent British settlement in what would become the United States. Built on tabacco and trade with Native Americans, it had many more men than women—and an extremely high death rate in the early years."
"First slaves in British America"	1619	"Slavery did not become popular in Virginia until around 1660 because of the high death rate of residents...."
"The Mayflower arrives in Plimouth"	1620	"The \"Pilgrims\" of Plimouth were a slightly different form of protestantism than the Puritans of the Massachusetts Bay Colony; the two colonies were merged at the end of the 17th century. Though the Mayflower Company was intended to make money to repay its investors, it wasn't until the colony gave up its communal cultivation of land that it stopped being in danger of starving. (They would of course have starved without help from their Native American neighbors.)"
"Boston founded"	1630	"Named after Boston, England, Boston was the capital of the Massachusetts Bay Colony"
"Charles the First executed"	1649	"Charles the First walked and talked half an hour after his head was cut off."
"Hobbes' Leviathan Published"	1651	"Hobbes' work justified monarchy in the human attempt to escape the \"nasty, brutish, solitary, and short\" State of Warre"
"Restoration of the Monarchy in Britain"	1660	"After the \"Commonwealth Period\" when the British decided they didn't like Puritan rule under Oliver Cromwell, Charles II was restored to the throne."
"First slave law in Virginia"	1661	"This was the first of a series of laws that had the effect of closing off avenues to freedom and separating Black slaves and white indentured servants."
"King Phillip's War begins"	1675	"The bloodiest war in US History in terms of the percentage of residents killed as a \"Pan-Indian\" alliance under the Wampanoag leader Metacom pushed back against English settler encroachment"
"Dominion of New England created"	1686	"As part of the restored English monarchy's attempt to raise funds, Massachusetts, New York, and other colonies are merged into a mega-colony under the hated Sir Edmond Andros. After James II is deposed, the colonies revert to their earlier charters."
"Glorious Revolution of 1688"	1688	"After the Catholic James II had a son (replacing James' Protestant daughter Mary in the succession), he was deposed."
"Second Treatise on Civil Goverment"	1689	"Locke's seminal work justifying the Glorious Revolution of 1688 spelled out the right to revolution against a tyrannical goverment and promoted the (common!) idea that a person owned what they had created by their labor... unless someone else was paying for that labor."
"Salem Witch Hysteria"	1692	"There is no concensus as to what happened to turn the people of village of Danvers (not Salem) against their neighbors—was it ergot? the anxiety of Massachusetts' losing its status as a Puritan theocracy with most British control in the new 1691 charter? A land grab? Punishment against outspoken women? Undisputed: 19 were hanged, and six others lost their lives."



